Article
 Energy–speed relationship of quantum 
particles challenges Bohmian mechanics
 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-09099-4
 Received: 5 June 2024
 Accepted: 6 May 2025
 Published online: 2 July 2025
 Open access
 Check for updates
 Violetta Sharoglazova1, Marius Puplauskis1, Charlie Mattschas1, Chris Toebes1 & Jan Klaers1 ✉
 Classical mechanics characterizes the kinetic energy of a particle, the energy it holds 
due to its motion, as consistently positive. By contrast, quantum mechanics describes 
the motion of particles using wave functions, in which regions of negative local kinetic 
energy can emerge1. This phenomenon occurs when the amplitude of the wave 
function experiences notable decay, typically associated with quantum tunnelling. 
Here, we investigate the quantum mechanical motion of particles in a system of two 
coupled waveguides, in which the population transfer between the waveguides acts  
as a clock, allowing particle speeds along the waveguide axis to be determined.  
By applying this scheme to exponentially decaying quantum states at a reflective 
potential step, we determine an energy–speed relationship for particles with negative 
local kinetic energy. We find that the smaller the energy of the particles—in other words, 
the more negative the local kinetic energy—the higher the measured speed inside the 
potential step. Our findings contribute to the ongoing tunnelling time debate2–6 and 
can be viewed as a test of Bohmian trajectories in quantum mechanics7–9. Regarding  
the latter, we find that the measured energy–speed relationship does not align with the 
particle dynamics postulated by the guiding equation in Bohmian mechanics.
 Quantum particles can be found in regions in which classical particles 
are not allowed to exist. An example of this is evanescent (exponentially 
decaying) quantum states at potential barriers and steps. When a 
stream of particles encounters a potential step that is reflective from 
a classical viewpoint, there is a non-vanishing probability of finding 
particles within the potential step. This intriguing behaviour arises 
ψ
 −1 2
 from the ability of quantum mechanical states and their associated 
wave functions ψ(x) to generate domains of negative kinetic energy1, 
where 

 x p x
 ( ) ( )/2 <0
 ψ m
 . Here, 
 p and m denote the momentum  
oper ator and mass, respectively, and ψ(x) is considered an energy 
eigenstate. This ability enables quantum particles to migrate into 
regions considered energetically forbidden in classical terms while 
maintaining energy conservation. Although this is well known, the 
kinematic interpretation of these states raises questions that have not 
yet been conclusively answered. This includes questions about whether 
a speed can be assigned to these states of motion, and if so, how it 
depends on energy.
 The kinematic interpretation of classically forbidden states of motion 
is intrinsically linked to the longstanding problem of tunnelling times. 
This problem refers to the question of how long a particle needs to 
tunnel through a (finite) potential barrier2–6. Despite the controversy 
surrounding this topic, important insights, methodologies10–18 and 
experiments19–27 have emerged from this debate. Investigating energy
speed relationships in evanescent phenomena can contribute to the 
discussion by offering a complementary perspective on this problem. 
Speed measurements in quantum mechanics can also serve as tests 
for the Bohmian interpretation of quantum mechanics, in which par
ticle velocities play a very prominent part7,28–30. Apart from the 
Schrödinger equation, a guiding equation is assumed that assigns a 
velocity field vS
 (x, t) to a wave function 
using
 t
 v x x
 S
 ( , )= ∇ ( , ).
 ħ
 m S t
 x x x
 ψ t n t S t
 ( , )= ( , )exp(i ( , )) 
(1)
 Here, the real-valued functions n(x, t) and S(x, t) describe the parti
cle density and phase of the wave function, respectively. The veloc
ity field vS
 (x, t) gives rise to trajectories along which the particles are 
expected to move. If the initial particle positions of these trajectories 
are chosen according to the Born rule (quantum equilibrium hypoth
esis), the resulting probability density aligns with the predictions of 
standard quantum mechanics. Whether this implies that both theo
ries generally make identical predictions remains a matter of debate. 
Discrepancies are sought, for example, in temporal quantities such 
as tunnelling or arrival times31–34. Although measurement results in 
standard quantum mechanics are considered inherently random, the 
existence of Bohmian mechanics—a fully deterministic dynamical  
system—demonstrates that quantum phenomena do not necessarily 
rely on randomness at their core. These sharply divergent views on the 
fundamental processes of nature motivate the search for experimental 
tests to distinguish between the two theories.
 In our experiments, we investigate states of motion that arise when a 
particle is reflected from a potential step. Standard quantum mechan
ics does not incorporate particle velocities into its formalism in the 
same explicit way as Bohmian mechanics. Moreover, conventional 
measures of motion—such as group or phase velocity—do not yield 
physically meaningful results in this scenario. To measure particle 
speeds associated with these states, we compare translational motion 
1Adaptive Quantum Optics, MESA+ Institute of Nanotechnology, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands. ✉e-mail: j.klaers@utwente.nl
 Nature | Vol 643 | 3 July 2025 | 67
Article
 Height (nm)
 a
 z
 b
 Laser
 Camera
 Dichroic
 mirror
 Objective
 c
 15
 10
 5
 0–900–800–700–600–500–400–300–200–100
 x (μm)
 0
 100
 200
 300
 y
 z x
 m
 a
 400
 500
 600
 700
 12
 Max
 Δ
 > hJ0
 
Δ
 |   | < hJ0
 Δ
 < –hJ0
 Microcavity
 y
 |m,a
 |2
 10
 Height (nm)
 8
 6
 4
 2
 J0
 m
 a
 y x
 0
 z x
 200
 400
 x (μm)
 Fig. 1 | Experimental setup for measuring the speed of particles. a, Schematic 
of the experimental setup. The microcavity consists of two planar mirrors, one 
of which is nanostructured, with an optically active dye in between. The optical 
medium can be non-resonantly pumped to induce a lasing process, generating 
microcavity photons at the point of pumping. A small amount of the light 
circulating in the microcavity is transmitted through the mirrors and can be 
imaged onto a camera. b, Height map and cross-sections (see colour coding)  
of the nanostructured mirror. The height profile of the nanostructured mirror 
effectively induces a potential energy landscape that confines and guides the 
photons in the transverse plane of the resonator. Specifically, the light is guided 
in a waveguiding potential from x = −900 μm to the end of the structure at 
x = 500 μm. In the first section, from x = −900 μm to x = −600 μm, a linear ramp 
potential is superimposed on the waveguide potential. By changing the position 
600
 Min
 0
 20
 0
 y (μm)
 20
 20
 15
 10
 5
 0
 Height (nm)
 of the non-resonant optical pumping along the ramp with a spatial light 
modulator (SLM), we can set the initial potential energy of photons. At x = 0,  
a step potential of height V0
 = (0.538 ± 0.003) meV is superimposed on the 
waveguide that runs from x = 0 μm to x = 500 μm. Apart from the main waveguide 
described above (red cross-section), an auxiliary waveguide (green cross-section) 
is introduced at the start of the step potential at x = 0. This effectively creates  
a double-well potential in the direction orthogonal to the waveguide axis (grey 
cross-section), with a coupling between the respective ground states of the wells 
of J0
 = 2π(6.34 ± 0.01) GHz. c, Camera images showing the photon populations in 
the coupled waveguides for three distinct energy regimes associated with three 
different dynamics: population oscillations in the classically allowed regime 
Δ ħJ
 ( > ) 0 , long-range non-oscillatory propagation Δ ħ
 decay Δ ħ
 ( <− )
 J
 J
 0 . Scale bar, 50 μm (b, height); 100  μm (b, length).
 within a waveguide to population hopping between waveguides. Ini
tially, consider a system of two degenerate localized quantum states 
that are coupled to each other with a coupling constant J0
 > 0. If the 
probability amplitude is initially concentrated entirely in one of the 
states (with a value set to 1), the population in the initially unoccupied 
state follows sin2(J0
 t) as a function of time t and, consequently, for 
small times, increases as (J0
 t)2. Provided the coupling constant is 
known, the respective populations of the two states can be under
stood as a measure of time. We then translate this behaviour to a sys
tem of two coupled waveguides. Consider two parallel waveguides, 
each capable of restricting the motion of particles to one dimension. 
When these two waveguides are brought in proximity, tunnelling 
processes allow particle exchange between the waveguides, which 
can be described by a coupling constant J0
 as introduced above. If 
at a certain point x = 0 the entire population is concentrated in one 
waveguide, then, sufficiently close to x = 0, the population of the 
other waveguide is expected to grow as (J0
 x/v)2 (replacing t with x/v). 
Thus, provided that the coupling constant J0
 is known, we can infer the 
speed v by measuring the spatial population build-up in the initially 
unoccupied state. For a more formal justification of this measurement 
scheme, based on modelling the system using coupled Schrödinger 
equations, we refer to the Methods and ref. 35. We emphasize that this 
measurement scheme does not determine the direction of motion 
of particles; thus, it is not a velocity measurement. For more details, 
see the Methods.
 To implement this scheme experimentally, we use a quantum-confined 
photon gas in a planar optical microcavity36–39. In this system, the pho
tons essentially behave like massive particles in two dimensions. More 
specifically, the mirrors of the microcavity restrict the allowed values 
(| |≤ ) 0 and evanescent 
for the photon wavevector k = (kx
 , ky
 , kz
 ) to those that satisfy a resonance 
condition along the optical axis, that is kz
 = qπ/D0
 . Here, q = 1, 2, 3, … is 
the longitudinal mode number and D0
 is the spatial separation of the 
mirrors. If the photons travel predominantly in the direction of the 
optical axis (paraxial limit), the projection of the photon motion onto 
the resonator plane creates a two-dimensional non-relativistic gas of 
particles with wavevectors (kx
 , ky
 ). In this projection, the photons 
acquire an effective mass m, whose value follows the energy– 
mass equivalence 
=
 0
 ∼
 E mc
 ∼
 SLM
 2, where E0
 is the energy of the transverse 
ground mode and ∼ c is the speed of light in the resonator medium36. 
The latter follows from the photonic energy–momentum relation
ship 
ph
 E ħ = c
 ∣ ∣
 k , which, assuming a paraxial limit 
be approximated by E m
 ph
 m ħcq D E
 = π/ = /c
 2
 0 0
 ≈ + ( + )/2
 c ħ k k m
 |
 ,
 xy
 ≪
 | | |
 k k
 z
 ∼
 2 2 2 2
 x y
 , can  
, with the photon mass 
∼ ∼ . In our experiments, we have m ≈ 6.95 × 10−36 kg. 
In this system, the transverse motion of the photons can be precisely 
controlled by nanostructured mirror surfaces. It can be shown39 
that a local change in the distance between the mirrors Δd(x, y) intro
duces a potential energy V(x, y) for the particles that follows V x y
 ( , )= 
∼
 2
 − ( , )/
 mc Δd x y D
 0. In our experiment, this effect is used to capture pho
tons in one-dimensional waveguide potentials and to couple waveguide 
pairs in a controlled manner. Owing to a small amount of mirror trans
mission with a rate of γ ≈ 3.7 GHz, corresponding to a particle lifetime 
of τ = 1/γ ≈ 270 ps, particle densities in the resonator plane can be fully 
reconstructed by imaging the transmitted light onto a camera. This is 
true regardless of whether the transverse state of the emitted light 
represents evanescent or propagating solutions, allowing us to study 
evanescent phenomena at semi-infinitely extended step potentials.
 The core of our experimental setup, as described in Fig. 1a, consists 
of a high-finesse microcavity with a dye medium. One of the mirrors is 
68 | Nature | Vol 643 | 3 July 2025
Nature | Vol 643 | 3 July 2025 | 69
 nanostructured to create waveguiding potentials for photons in the 
transverse plane of the resonator. The main waveguide begins with a 
linear ramp, allowing us to vary the initial potential energy of the pho
tons by changing the point along the ramp at which we optically pump 
the system with a non-resonant laser pulse. The pulse duration of 26 ns 
(full width at half maximum (FWHM)) is considerably longer than all 
relevant time scales in the system, creating a quasi-stationary scenario 
for all our experiments. This pumping triggers a lasing process that 
favours the creation of photons with low kinetic energy at the position 
of the pump, maximizing the overlap of their wave function with the 
optical gain. The potential energy of the photons created at a certain 
position in the ramp is then converted into kinetic energy as the pho
tons move down and reach a region of constant potential. The photons 
then impinge on the step potential, as shown in Fig. 1b, in which a sec
ond waveguide opens up. We refer to this second waveguide as the 
auxiliary waveguide in the subsequent discussion. Three examples 
showing the photon densities in the microcavity for different pump 
spot positions are shown in Fig. 1c. The densities are recorded by imag
ing light transmitted through one of the mirrors onto a camera. The 
auxiliary waveguide allows us to determine the particle speed by com
paring the translational motion along the waveguide axis with the hop
ping between waveguides. A prerequisite for this is determining the 
coupling constant J0
 between the waveguides. This can be performed 
through a wavenumber analysis of observed mode patterns in the  
classically allowed regime, yielding J0
 = 2π(6.34 ± 0.01) GHz or 
ħJ =(26.22±0.04)µeV 0
 . For further details, see the Methods. In the 
same way, we can also determine all other quantities of interest, such 
as the height of the step potential V0
 = (0.538 ± 0.003) meV and the 
kinetic energy E of the incoming particles.
 Figure 2a,b shows the populations |ψm,a
 |2 in the main (ψm
 ) and the 
auxiliary (ψa
 ) waveguides as a function of position x for specific values 
of Δ E V ħJ = − + 0 0
 , which corresponds to the kinetic energy of the par
ticles in the step potential. For Δ ħJ > 0
 (Fig. 2a), we observe that the 
population oscillates between the waveguides as the particles 
propagate in the step potential. The observed population decay over 
several hundred micrometres is because of mirror transmission and 
can be used to experimentally determine the photon loss rate γ intro
duced before. For Δ ħJ <− 0
 (Fig. 2b), evanescent types of wave functions 
are observed for which the populations in the waveguides relax to a 
common value. Figure 2c shows the decay constant of the population 
in the main waveguide, denoted by κ, as a function of Δ (Methods). For 
sufficiently large |Δ|, the measurement is in excellent agreement with 
the expected decay constant κ mΔ ħ = 2 | |/ .
 Figure 2d,e shows the relative population in the auxiliary waveguide 
ρa
 = |ψa
 |2/(|ψm
 |2 + |ψa
 |2) as a function of distance to the potential step for 
different values of Δ. Calculating the relative populations eliminates 
common factors affecting both waveguides, such as the exponential 
decay in the case of negative Δ. In all cases, the data are compatible 
with a quadratic increase in relative population. By modelling our  
data with ρa
 = (J0
 x/v)2, we obtain the particle speed v shown in Fig. 3a.  
It is to be noted that, within the experimental uncertainties, v is a 
mirror-symmetrical function of Δ. For negative Δ, this means, rather 
counterintuitively, that the lower the energy of the particles, the faster 
the particles move within the step potential. We emphasize that the 
measured speed represents the local speed of particles directly behind 
the potential step. In the coupled waveguide system, a position- 
dependent state of motion can arise from an interplay with the coupling 
energy, even if the potential energy remains constant. However, these 
effects are not expected when the coupling energy is negligible, spe
cifically when Δ ħJ | | 0 ≫ . In this limit, our data align well with v Δm = 2| |/ 
for both negative and positive values of Δ (Fig. 3a). The residual differ
ences are probably caused by a systematic overestimation of the speed 
in the fitting procedure of up to 6.7% (see the Methods for details). 
Note that for negative Δ, the speed v Δm = 2| |/ is proportional to the 
decay constant κ mΔ ħ = 2 | |/ , following v ħκm = / . Introducing the  
decay length λ = 1/κ, this relation can also be stated as λ ħmv = / ,  
which represents a de Broglie relation for evanescent particle states, 
connecting the decay length to the speed.
 a
 d
 b
 e
 c
 Populations (a.u.)
 Populations (a.u.)
 a
 (%)
 a
 (%)
 0
 0
 0–0.35–0.30–0.25–0.20–0.15–0.10–0.05 0
 0
 0.05
 0.10
 0.15
 0.20
 0.25
 Decay constant K (μm–1)–12–10–8–6–4–2 0
 15 10 10 5
 5
 x (μm) x (μm)
 x (μm) x (μm)
 20 40 30
 10
 15
 0
 10
 20
 30
 100 0 100 200 300 400 500 0 60
 0
 1,000
 2,000
 3,000
 4,000
 0
 200
 400
 600
 800
 v ≈ 1,100 km s–1
 v ≈ 1,200 km s–1
 v ≈ 1,500 km s–1
 v ≈ 2,000 km s–1
 v ≈ 2,200 km s–1
 v ≈ 3,400 km s–1
 (meV) Δ
 (hJ0) Δ
 ≈ 0.06 meV Δ ≈ –0.03 meV Δ |m
 |2
 |a
 |2
 ≈ 0.28 meV Δ
 ≈ 0.12 meV Δ
 ≈ 0.06 meV Δ
 ≈ –0.03 meV Δ
 ≈ –0.04 meV Δ
 ≈ –0.07 meV Δ
 |m
 |2
 |a
 |2
 80 40 20
 Fig. 2 | Populations |ψm,a
 |2 as a function of energy Δ and position x. 
 a, Measurement example of the particle densities along the waveguide axis  
in the main waveguide |ψm
 |2 (blue) and auxiliary waveguide |ψa
 |2 (green) in the 
classically allowed parameter regime Δ ħJ ( > ) 0 . The fast periodic modulations 
on top of the population curves stem from a residual reflection at the end of  
the coupled waveguide system. b, Particle densities in the classically forbidden 
regime. c, Decay constant κ of the population in the main waveguide for different 
energies Δ (see the  Methods for further details). The observed decay constant 
closely follows κ mΔ ħ = 2 | |/ . Error bars indicate the standard error of the mean. 
d, Examples of measured relative populations in the auxiliary waveguide 
ρa
 = |ψa
 |2/(|ψm
 |2 + |ψa
 |2) for classically allowed states. A parabolic fit ρa
 = (J0
 x/v)2 
is used to determine the speed of the motion. e, Relative populations for 
evanescent states in which the step is fully reflective. In these states, particles 
enter the step potential and eventually exit it with their direction of motion 
reversed. As in the case of the propagating states, a parabolic fit ρa
 = (J0
 x/v)2 
is used to determine the speed of the motion. All data shown in this figure, 
except those in the inset of c, are derived from single data-taking events, 
each comprising 20 optical excitations of the system.
70 | Nature | Vol 643 | 3 July 2025
 Article
 As an application of the measured energy–speed relation, we con
sider the dwell time of particles in the step potential13. The definition 
of the dwell time is based on the idea that, in a steady state, the storage 
time of particles in a reservoir should be given by τdwell
 = N/jin
 , where N 
is the number of stored particles and jin
 is the incoming particle current. 
For a fully reflecting step potential—producing a standing wave pattern 
in front of the step and an exponentially decaying wave function within 
it—the incoming and outgoing particle currents can be assumed to 
have equal magnitudes but opposite directions. In analysing the exper
iment, the incoming current is taken as jin
 = (|ψmax
 |2/4)vin
 , where ψmax
  
is the maximum amplitude of the wave function in front of the step. 
The factor of 4 arises from both the standing wave interference effect 
and the division into incoming and outgoing components. Alterna
tively, we could use the average density in front of the step along with 
a division factor of 2. The velocity vin
 is taken as v ħk m = / in 0 , where k0
 
is determined from the periodicity of the observed standing wave 
interference pattern. Note that this determination of jin
 does not hold 
in the framework of Bohmian mechanics, as will be discussed below. 
The dwell time based on this procedure is observed to be within 1–2 ps 
for a wide range of energies (Fig. 3b). Using the measured energy– 
speed relation, we can give a semiclassical estimate of τdwell
 by consid
ering τλ
 = λ/v, where the decay length λ corresponds to a typical travel 
distance into and out of the step potential. The latter is derived from 
∫ x xx x λ 2 =2 ( ) d = x>0 0
 −1
 0
 ∞ ϱ ϱ , where ϱx ( )=(e ) x λ − / 2 and ∫ x x = ( )d 0 0
 ∞ ϱ ϱ . 
The quantity τλ
 is found to be close to the dwell time for a wide energy 
range (Fig. 3b). We consider this to be further evidence for the physical 
significance of the found energy–speed relation.
 In further measurements, shown in Fig. 4, we interfere quantum 
states in the step potential with their spatially mirrored images to 
detect phase gradients (see the Methods for further details). These 
phase gradients can then be converted into velocities following equa
tion (1). For Δ > 0 (Fig. 4b, left), we obtain velocities that are compatible 
with the results derived from the population transfer measurements 
shown in Fig. 3a. For Δ < 0, the phase gradients are found to be close 
to zero (Fig. 4b, right). If we translate the residual phase gradients into 
velocities using equation (1), we obtain on average vS
 = (59 ± 42) km s−1, 
as shown in Fig. 4c, which is consistent with zero. The vanishing of vS
 
indicates a vanishing net particle current, meaning that the motion 
becomes non-directional as the step potential becomes fully reflective. 
The Bohmian interpretation of equation (1) goes further by postulat
ing that vS
 is a complete characterization of the state of motion of the 
particles. Therefore, a vanishing vS
 not only indicates non-directionality 
but also implies that the particles are at rest. Note that this implica
tion is in contradiction with the conclusions drawn from our speed 
measurements (Fig. 3a).
 The assumption that particles in the step potential are at rest also 
implies a fundamentally different behaviour of other quantities.  
The dwell time, for example, can be identically defined by τdwell
 = N/jin
 in 
both standard quantum mechanics and Bohmian mechanics. As the wave 
functions are identical, the particle number N—defined as the integral of 
the modulus of the wave function squared within the step potential—is 
the same in both cases. However, the incoming particle current jin
 can
not, in general, be assumed to be identical. Scattering at a fully reflective 
potential step—when the energy of the particle is lower than the step 
potential—gives rise to eigenfunctions that can be chosen to be purely 
real-valued. The corresponding absence of phase gradients indicates, 
in the Bohmian framework, that the particles are at rest everywhere in 
the system. In other words, there are no particle currents—specifically, 
no incoming current into the step potential. Consequently, the ratio  
N/jin
 diverges, implying an infinite dwell time. Note that jin
 = 0 is not 
merely a consequence but also a requirement within Bohmian mechan
ics to remain consistent with the guiding equation inside the potential 
step, which also predicts the absence of motion—and thus an infinite 
dwell time. Thus, the dwell time for scattering at a semi-infinite step 
potential is an example of a physical quantity that, although identi
cally defined and measurable in both Bohmian mechanics and standard 
quantum mechanics, yields different values in the two theories.
 Furthermore, an absence of particle motion in the step potential—and 
consequently an infinite dwell time—implies that losses are essential 
to the scattering process observed in our experiment, as every particle 
entering the potential step would eventually be lost because of the 
dwell time exceeding the finite lifetime of the particles of 270 ps. By 
contrast, the wave function observed in the vicinity of the potential step 
closely matches the wave function expected for a lossless system (see, 
for example, Fig. 2c), thereby implying that losses are not significant in –12–10–8–6–4–2 0
 0
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 Dwell time (ps)
 b
 
 dwell–15–10–5 0 5 10 15–0.4–0.3–0.2–0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
 0
 1,000
 2,000
 3,000
 4,000
 5,000
 v (km s–1)
 a
 Experiment
 (meV) Δ
 (meV) Δ
 (hJ0) Δ
 (hJ0) Δ–0.05–0.10–0.15–0.20–0.25–0.30–0.35
 v = m
 2|  | Δ
 V0 – |  | / (V0 |  |) h Δ Δ
 h / (2|  |) Δ
 Fig. 3 | Particle speed and dwell time. a, Particle speed v at the potential step 
as a function of energy Δ. Blue markers indicate the speed values obtained from 
the parabolic fitting of the population increase in the auxiliary waveguide.  
The speed obtained in this way is found to be a mirror-symmetric function of 
the energy Δ. For sufficiently large |Δ|, the data align well with v Δm = 2 / 
(green line). For negative Δ, this means that the lower the speed of the incoming 
particles, the faster the particles move within the step potential. The lowest 
speed values are found in the vicinity of Δ = 0 and are close to the theoretical 
prediction35 v ħJ m = / ≈777kms min 0
 −1 for J0
 = 2π × 6.34 GHz. Error bars indicate 
the standard error of the mean. b, Dwell time as a function of energy. The dwell 
time τdwell
 (squares) describes how long particles are stored in the step potential 
and can be determined using τdwell
 = N/jin
 , where N is the number of stored 
particles and jin
 is the incoming particle current. Based on the energy–speed 
relation in a, a semiclassical estimate of τdwell
 can be introduced using τλ
 = λ/v, 
where λ is the decay length (circles). This estimate is found to be in good 
agreement with τdwell
 for a wide range of energies. The two solid lines give the 
expected behaviour for the dwell time and its semiclassical estimate. The given 
formulas are derived for a single waveguide step potential. Error bars for τdwell
 
indicate the standard error of the mean. Error bars for τλ
 are derived from error 
propagation.
a
 waveguides and population hopping between the waveguides. Quanti
Camera
 
 | + MeikMZI
 x|2
 Dove prism
 M
 b
 Δ
 ||
 ≈ 0.10 meV
 |M|
 
 Δ
 ||
 ≈ –0.08 meV
 x
 Signal (a.u.)
 π/ktot ≈ 3.4 μm
 π/ktot ≈ 4.2 μm–40
 c–20
 200
 0
 x (μm)
 20
 40–40–20
 0
 x (μm)
 vS
 〈vS〉
 vS (km s–1)–100
 100
 0–0.14–0.12–0.10
 Δ–0.08
 (meV)–0.06
 Fig. 4 | Phase gradient (Bohmian) velocity vS
 . a, To measure the phase 
gradient of quantum states in the step potential, we incorporate a Mach–Zehnder 
interferometer into our experimental setup. A Dove prism is placed in one  
arm of the interferometer to create a mirrored image of the input state. The 
wavenumber associated with the observed interference pattern at the camera, 
ktot
 = kMZI
 + kS
 , has two contributions: a component related to the alignment  
of the interferometer, kMZI
 , which can be determined in an independent 
measurement, and a component associated with the intrinsic phase gradient  
of the quantum state kS
 . b, The top row shows sketches of wave functions and 
their mirror images, ψ and ψM
 , interfering at the output of the interferometer  
in the classically allowed (left) and forbidden (right) regimes, respectively.  
The middle row displays images of experimentally obtained interference 
patterns. The bottom row shows the corresponding line-integrated densities. 
From the periodicity of the obtained interference patterns, we extract ktot
 .  
This is then converted to the velocity v ħk m ħk k m
 = / = ( − )/
 S S tot MZI . For the two 
shown cases, we obtain vS
 ≈ 2,400 km s−1 for Δ ≈ 0.1 meV and vS
 ≈ (31 ± 42) km s−1 
for Δ ≈ −0.08 meV. c Blue markers indicate the velocity vS
 in the classically 
forbidden regime, derived using the procedure described above. The green 
dashed line shows the average value, ⟨vS
 ⟩ = (59 ± 42) km s−1, of all measurements 
with Δ ≤ −0.05 meV. Error bars indicate the standard error of the mean.
 the scattering process. Thus, the wave picture based on the Schrödinger 
equation and the particle picture based on the guiding equation offer 
inconsistent accounts of the significance of losses in the scattering 
process, within the Bohmian interpretation of our experiment. Even 
independently of the speed measurements presented in this work, this 
discrepancy casts doubt on whether the guiding equation accurately 
captures the temporal dynamics of the scattering process.
 In this work, we have measured an energy–speed relationship for 
tunnelling particles based on the analysis of two orthogonal motions in 
a system of two coupled waveguides: translational motion along the 
tatively, we see agreement with an energy–speed relation 
= 2 / . 
For Δ < 0, this implies that particles move faster the less kinetic energy 
v Δm
 |M|
 20–0.04
 x
 40
 Max
 Min
 they have, that is, the more negative their local kinetic energy becomes. 
If the speed v is translated into the time τλ
 = λ/v, for E < V0
 and the decay 
length λ, this accurately reproduces the experimentally observed dwell 
time of the particles over a wide energy range. If v is translated into  
the time τb
 = b/v, for E < V0
 and the barrier width b, the result is the tun
nelling time proposed by Büttiker and Landauer12,13,40. These straight
forward applications of the measured energy–speed relation to 
evanescent phenomena suggest that this relation plays a fundamental 
part in quantum tunnelling. More broadly, our work indicates that, in 
addition to phase gradients, amplitude decays in quantum mechanical 
wave functions serve as indicators of motion, following a de Broglie 
relation λ ħmv
 = / , where λ is the decay length  and v denotes the nondi
rectional particle speed measured in this work. This contrasts with 
Bohmian mechanics, which considers phase gradients as the sole  
indicators of motion.
 Online content
 Any methods, additional references, Nature Portfolio reporting summa
ries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowl
edgements, peer review information; details of author contributions 
and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability 
are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-09099-4.
 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
Aharonov, Y., Popescu, S., Rohrlich, D. & Vaidman, L. Measurement of the negative kinetic 
energy of tunneling particles. In Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Foundations of Quantum Mechanics 
(eds Tsukada, M. et al.) JJAP Series 9, 251–253 (JJAP, 1993).
 Hauge, E. H. & Støvneng, J. A. Tunneling times: a critical review. J. Rev. Mod. Phys. 61,  
917–936 (1989).
 Landauer, R. & Martin, T. Barrier interaction time in tunnelling. Rev. Mod. Phys. 66, 217–228 
(1994).
 Winful, H. G. Tunneling time, the Hartman effect, and superluminality: a proposed 
resolution of an old paradox. Phys. Rep. 436, 1–69 (2006).
 Sainadh, U. S., Sang, R. T. & Litvinyuk, I. V. Attoclock and the quest for tunnelling time in 
strong-field physics. J. Phys. Photon. 2, 042002 (2020).
 Field, G. E. On the status of quantum tunnelling time. Eur. J. Philos. Sci. 12, 57 (2022).
 Bohm, D. A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of “hidden” 
variables. Phys. Rev. 85, 166–179 (1952).
 Kocsis, S. et al. Observing the average trajectories of single photons in a two-slit 
interferometer. Science 332, 1170–1173 (2011).
 Mahler, D. H. et al. Experimental nonlocal and surreal Bohmian trajectories. Sci. Adv. 2, 
e1501466 (2016).
 10. Baz, A. Lifetime of intermediate states. Yad. Fiz. 4, 252 (1966).
 11. 
Rybachenko, V. Time of particle penetrating through barrier. Yad. Fiz. 5, 895 (1967).
 12. 
Büttiker, M. & Landauer, R. Traversal time for tunneling. Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 1739–1742 
(1982).
 13. Büttiker, M. Larmor precession and the traversal time for tunneling. Phys. Rev. B 27,  
6178–6188 (1983).
 14. Pollak, E. & Miller, W. H. New physical interpretation for time in scattering theory.  
Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 115–118 (1984).
 15. Jayannavar, A. M. A note on traversal time for tunneling. Pramana 29, 341–344 (1987).
 16. Leavens, C. R. Transmission, reflection and dwell times within Bohm’s causal 
interpretation of quantum mechanics. Solid State Commun. 74, 923–928 (1990).
 17. 
Spiller, T. P., Clark, T. D., Prance, R. J. & Prance, H. Barrier traversal time in the quantum 
potential picture. Europhys. Lett. 12, 1–4 (1990).
 18. Yamada, N. Unified derivation of tunneling times from decoherence functionals.  
Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 170401 (2004).
 19. Ranfagni, A., Mugnai, D., Fabeni, P. & Pazzi, G. P. Delay‐time measurements in narrowed 
waveguides as a test of tunneling. Appl. Phys. Lett. 58, 774–776 (1991).
 20. Enders, A. & Nimtz, G. On superluminal barrier traversal. J. Phys. I France 2, 1693–1698 (1992).
 21. 
Steinberg, A. M., Kwiat, P. G. & Chiao, R. Y. Measurement of the single-photon tunneling 
time. Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 708–711 (1993).
 22. Spielmann, C., Szipöcs, R., Stingl, A. & Krausz, F. Tunneling of optical pulses through 
photonic band gaps. Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 2308–2311 (1994).
 23. Deutsch, M. & Golub, Optical Larmor clock: measurement of the photonic tunneling time. 
J. Phys. Rev. A 53, 434–439 (1996).
 24. Balcou, P. & Dutriaux, L. Dual optical tunneling times in frustrated total internal reflection. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 851–854 (1997).
 25. Hino, M. et al. Measurement of Larmor precession angles of tunneling neutrons.  
Phys. Rev. A 59, 2261–2268 (1999).
 26. Ramos, R., Spierings, D., Racicot, I. & Steinberg, A. M. Measurement of the time spent by a 
tunnelling atom within the barrier region. Nature 583, 529–532 (2020).
 27. Spierings, D. C. & Steinberg, A. M. Observation of the decrease of Larmor tunneling times 
with lower incident energy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 133001 (2021).
 Nature | Vol 643 | 3 July 2025 | 71
Article
 28. Bell, J. S. On the impossible pilot wave. Found. Phys. 12, 989–999 (1982).
 29. Dürr, D., Goldstein, S. & Zanghi, N. Quantum equilibrium and the origin of absolute 
uncertainty. J. Stat. Phys. 67, 843–907 (1992).
 30. Holland, P. R. The Quantum Theory of Motion: An Account of the de Broglie–Bohm Causal 
Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1995).
 31. Das, S. & Dürr, D. Arrival time distributions of spin-1/2 particles. Sci. Rep. 9, 2242 (2019).
 32. Drezet, A. Arrival time and Bohmian mechanics: it is the theory which decides what we 
can measure. Symmetry 16, 1325 (2024).
 33. Goldstein, S., Tumulka, R. & Zanghi, N. On the spin dependence of detection times and 
the nonmeasurability of arrival times. Sci. Rep. 14, 3775 (2024).
 34. Goldstein, S., Tumulka, R. & Zanghi, N. Arrival times versus detection times. Found. Phys. 
54, 63 (2024).
 35. Klaers, J., Sharoglazova, V. & Toebes, C. Particle motion associated with wave-function 
density gradients. Phys. Rev. A 107, 052201 (2023).
 36. Klaers, J., Schmitt, J., Vewinger, F. & Weitz, M. Bose–Einstein condensation of photons in 
an optical microcavity. Nature 468, 545–548 (2010).
 37. Klaers, J., Vewinger, F. & Weitz, M. Thermalization of a two-dimensional photonic gas in  
a ‘white wall’ photon box. Nature Phys. 6, 512–515 (2010).
 38. Vretenar, M., Toebes, C. & Klaers, J. Modified Bose-Einstein condensation in an optical 
quantum gas. Nat. Commun. 12, 5749 (2021).
 39. Vretenar, M., Kassenberg, B., Bissesar, S., Toebes, C. & Klaers, J. Controllable Josephson 
junction for photon Bose-Einstein condensates. Phys. Rev. Res. 3, 023167 (2021).
 40. Jonson, M. The dynamical image potential for tunneling electrons. Solid State Commun. 
33, 743–746 (1980).
 Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 
4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution 
and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate 
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, 
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line 
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your 
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, 
visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
 © The Author(s) 2025
 72 | Nature | Vol 643 | 3 July 2025
Methods
 Experimental setup
 Our experiments are performed in a high-finesse optical microcavity 
consisting of two dielectric mirrors. We use Rhodamine 101 dissolved 
in ethylene glycol as an active optical medium at a concentration of 
1 mmol l−1. One of the mirrors is fixed, whereas the other is connected 
to three piezo-electrical actuators, enabling precise adjustments to 
the cavity length and tilt. The mirror separation is set approximately 
to D0
 = 15 μm. Both the mirror separation and the angular orientation 
of the two mirrors are stabilized during the experiment. For the mirror 
separation, we measure the wavelength of the emitted light and provide 
electrical feedback to the piezos to stabilize the desired cavity length. 
For the angular alignment, a new technique based on the inverse solu
tion of the Schrödinger equation was developed41. We use non-resonant 
pumping at a wavelength of 532 nm to create regions of high chemical 
potential, in which photons condense36,37 and form coherent states 
of light at a wavelength of about 650 nm. The laser pulse duration is 
around 26 ns (FWHM) at a pulse repetition rate of 500 Hz. A spatial light 
modulator is used to move the pumping spot in the plane of the cavity, 
allowing different particle energies to be probed. We use a band-pass 
filter with a central wavelength of 650 nm and a width of 10 nm (FWHM) 
before the cameras to isolate the signal from the background. We fur
thermore use a D-mirror to split the light emitted from the cavity and 
to image different spatial regions of the signal onto different cameras. 
This approach allows us to isolate high signals in the waveguide before 
the potential step at x = 0 from (potentially) low signals in the coupled 
waveguide region.
 Sample preparation
 We apply a new nano-structuring method42 to create waveguiding 
potentials for the photons in the transverse plane of the resonator. 
The main waveguide (Fig. 1b) begins with a linear ramp, allowing us to 
vary the initial potential energy of the photons by changing the point 
along the ramp at which we optically pump the system. The potential 
energy of the photons is then converted into kinetic energy as the pho
tons move downward and reach a region of constant potential. The 
photons encounter the step potential in which a second waveguide 
opens up. The coupled waveguide potentials are designed to gradually 
diminish at large distances to minimize back reflections from the end. 
The height map of the mirror surface (Fig. 1b) is determined through 
Mirau interferometry.
 Measurement scheme for determining particle speeds
 For a formal justification of the experimental method, we model 
the coupled waveguide system using the following set of steady- 
state Schrödinger equations (valid in a quasi-continuous-wave  
configuration):
 Eψ ħ
 m
 ψ
 x Vψ ħJ ψ ψ =−2
 d
 d + + ( − ), (2) m
 2
 m
 2 0 m 0 a m
 Eψ ħ
 m
 ψ
 x Vψ ħJ ψ ψ =−2
 d
 d + + ( − ), (3) a
 2
 a
 2 0 a 0 m a
 where ψm
 represents the wave functions in the main waveguide, ψa
 
represents the wave functions in the auxiliary waveguide, E is the 
total energy, V0
 is the potential energy and J0
 is the coupling constant 
between the waveguides. An ansatz for the solution of these equations 
can be written as
 ψ kx ∝cos( )e , (4) kx
 m 1
 i 2
 ψ kx ∝sin( )e . (5) kx
 a 1
 i 2
 This ansatz describes the motion of particles as plane waves, 
exp(ik2
 x), which, in case where E < V0
 , transitions into an evanescent 
solution. The relative population of the waveguides is determined by 
the population transfer factors cos(k1
 x) and sin(k1
 x). Using the ansatz 
provided above, the increase in population in the auxiliary waveguide 
can be shown to follow
 ρ x ψ
 ψ ψ k x ( )= | |
 | | +| | ≈| | , (6) a
 a
 2
 m
 2
 a
 2 1
 2 2
 for small x. Thus, a parabolic increase in the relative population in the 
auxiliary waveguide is expected, regardless of the type of motion. The 
coefficient |k1
 |2 is experimentally accessible. By applying the ansatz, 
equations (4) and (5), to the coupled Schrödinger equations, we find 
that k1
 and k2
 satisfy the relation
 k mJ
 ħk = . (7) 1
 0
 2
 This relation holds irrespective of whether the solution describes a 
propagating or evanescent state. It forms the basis of our measurement 
scheme, as it connects the motional state (k2
 ) with the relative popula
tion in the waveguides (k1
 ), our measurement quantity. To justify the 
method, it is not strictly necessary to use the full information provided 
by equation (7). The key point of interest is that k1
 is proportional to J0
 
(given that k2
 is independent of J0
 , which holds true for E V ħJ | − | 0 0
 ≫ ; 
ref. 35). This relationship is, in principle, already evident from the cou
pling between two localized states, as discussed in this study. As J0
 is a 
property of our measurement device and not of the state of motion, 
we factor it out as a pre-factor, |k1
 |2 = (J0
 /v)2, resulting in
 ρ x k x J
 v x ( )≈| | = . (8) a 1
 2 2 0
 2
 2 
  
 
  
 The remaining factor v has the dimensions of a velocity and an 
undetermined sign. Most importantly, this quantity determines the 
spatial length scale of the population build-up in the coupled wave
guide system—an effect that genuinely represents a spatio-temporal 
phenomenon, distributing particles in space (x) relative to a temporal 
reference (J0
 ). We regard this as a property that can be attributed only to  
a form of motion. It is important to emphasize that this measurement 
scheme does not determine a sign of v. A sign implies directionality, 
indicating net particle transport. Any measurement scheme sensitive 
to direction must necessarily yield a velocity of zero for an evanescent 
state of the form exp(−x/λ), as these states do not imply net particle 
transport. Conversely, any scheme that assigns a non-zero speed value 
to a state of this form, which is true for the scheme presented above, 
must be insensitive to direction.
 Statistical error analysis
 All errors shown in the figures represent standard errors of the mean. 
For Fig. 3, these were obtained by averaging 156 independent meas
urements performed over several days. For Fig. 4, we average over 
19 measurements. No dataset was excluded. Apart from statistical 
errors, we expect systematic errors mainly from two sources. This will 
be discussed below.
 Determination of the energy E of the incident particles
 The (kinetic) energy E of the incoming particles is obtained by analys
ing the standing wave pattern resulting from the superposition of the 
incident particle stream with the particle stream reflected from the 
potential step. First, the observed intensity pattern is transformed to 
Fourier space. Then, the dominant spatial frequency kmax
 is extracted. 
This corresponds to a wavenumber of the particles of k0
 = kmax
 /2. The 
additional factor of 2 arises because the Fourier analysis is based on 
Article
 intensity patterns rather than the complex amplitude of the inci
dent wave. With this, the energy of the incident particles follows as 
E ħk m =( ) /2 0
 2 .
 Determination of the coupling constant J0
 For determining J0
 , we use the relation J ħkk m = / 0 1 2 (ref. 35). This  
relation applies to classically allowed motion in the coupled waveguide 
system (and remains valid in the classically forbidden regime). The 
wavenumber k1
 represents the spatial periodicity of the population 
transfer between the main and auxiliary waveguides. This is derived 
by fitting the relative population of the waveguides with harmonic 
functions, for example, ρa
 = sin2(k1
 x). The wavenumber k2
 descri
bes the motion of the particles within a waveguide of the coupled 
waveguide system. It is determined similarly to k0
 by analysing a stand
ing wave pattern created by a small residual back reflection from  
the open end of the coupled waveguide system. In this way, we obtain 
J0
 = 2π(6.34 ± 0.01) GHz for the coupling constant when averaging over 
all 156 measurements.
 Determination of the decay constant κ
 For Δ < 0, we derive a position-dependent decay constant in the  
main waveguide using ∣ ∣ κx ψ x x ( )=(−1/2)×d[ln( ( ) )]/d m
 2 . The decay 
constant κ is considered to be the maximum value encountered in  
κ(x), which in all observed cases is located close to the potential step.
 Determination of the step height V0
 For determining V0
 , we use the relation V E ħk m ħJ = −( ) /2 + 0 2
 2
 0
 , which 
is valid asymptotically in both the classically allowed and classi
cally forbidden regimes35. In the classically allowed regime, the wave
number k2
 describes the phase gradient of the quantum state within 
a waveguide of the coupled waveguide system. In the classically  
forbidden regime, k2
 becomes imaginary and describes the decay of 
the quantum state, k2
 = iκ. Consequently, ħk m ( ) /2 2
 2 becomes nega
tive. To a good approximation, both regimes yield agreeing values  
for V0
 . When averaging over all 156 measurements, we obtain 
V0
 = (0.538 ± 0.003) meV.
 Determination of the speed v and its expected systematic errors
 The particle speed given in Fig. 3a is obtained by fitting the measured 
relative population in the auxiliary waveguide, ρa
 (x), to the model 
f x J x x v ( )=[ ( − )/ ′] 0 0
 2. The fitting procedure aims to find the value for  
v′ that minimizes the error ∫ Rv xρx f x ( ′)= d [ ( )− ( )] x
 x
 a
 2
 0
 max . As the coupl
ing constant J0
 can be independently determined, the fitting proce
dure depends on two input parameters: x0
 and xmax
 , which are the lower  
and upper bounds of the error integral, respectively. These parameters 
are considered the main sources of systematic errors in our data eval
uation. Ideally, x0
 is simply defined by the position of the potential step; 
however, owing to the limitations of the nano-structuring method used 
for sample preparation, which has a minimal structure size of approx
imately 4 μm (FWHM of a point-like structure)42, the potential step is 
not perfectly sharp. In our data analysis, we treat x0
 as a global param
eter set identically across all measurements. Its uncertainty is assumed 
to be 2 μm. Varying x0
 by this amount systematically shifts the obtained 
speed values by an average of 8.5% compared with the results presented 
in Fig. 3a. The second parameter, xmax
 , determines the extent of data 
considered in the fitting procedure. Generally, using more data will 
enhance the reliability of the speed determination. By contrast, if xmax
 
is set too high, the accuracy of the parabolic approximation f(x) 
decreases, introducing systematic errors. This systematic error can 
be estimated as follows. First, we consider the case of classically allowed 
motion in which the experimentally obtained data are expected to  
be of the form ρ x J xv ηx ( )=sin( / )+ ( ) a
 2
 0
 . Here, η(x) is additive noise 
with an expectation value of zero, ⟨η(x)⟩ = 0. For an individual mea
surement outcome, the optimal value for v′ can be determined by  
solving Rv v d ( ′)/d ′=0 for v′. This condition can be expressed as 
∫ x f v f ρ d 2(d /d ′)( − )=0 x
 x
 a 0
 max . Averaging over many realizations, ρa
 is 
replaced by ρ J xv =sin( / ) a
 2
 0
 due to the assumed properties of  
the noise. The (average) optimal value for v′ is then obtained from  
the equation ∫ x J x v J xv J xv d 2(−2 / ′ )[( / ′) −sin( / )]=0 x
 x
 0
 2 3
 0
 2 2
 0 0
 max . Solv
ing this equation analytically yields a cumbersome expression  
for v′, which we will not reproduce here. For this work, it is suffi
cient to approximate the solution by a series expansion, giving 
v v ε ε ′/ −1=(5/42) +(1543/31752) 2. Here, ε is the maximum relative 
population considered in the fitting procedure, which is related to xmax
 
by x v J ε =( / )arcsin max 0
 . In our analysis of the data in the classically 
allowed regime, we choose ε = 0.25, which yields v′/v − 1 = 0.033. This 
indicates that using data up to a relative population of 25% in the aux
iliary waveguide introduces a systematic error in the extracted speeds 
of approximately 3% because of the parabolic approximation. This is 
comparable to the statistical uncertainties in our measurements.  
A similar calculation can be performed in the classically forbidden 
regime, in which we assume the experimentally obtained data to be  
of the form ρ x J xv J xv J xv ηx ( )=sinh( / )/[sinh( / )+cosh( / )]+ ( ) a
 2
 0
 2
 0
 2
 0
 .  
The result of this calculation is v′/v − 1 = (25/42)ε + (24463/31752)ε2. 
Thus, for the same value of ε, the systematic deviation for v′ due to the 
parabolic approximation turns out to be five times larger in the classi
cally forbidden regime than in the classically allowed regime. This 
needs to be considered when choosing an appropriate value for ε. 
Furthermore, it must be considered that data up to a specific relative 
population are not necessarily available for all energies Δ. In the clas
sically forbidden regime, the point at which a certain population level 
is reached progressively moves deeper into the step potential as Δ 
becomes smaller and the particle speed increases. Moreover, the decay 
constant increases, causing the signal to decay more rapidly. This can 
prevent observing specific population levels due to noise. Therefore, 
in our data analysis, we adjust ε as we move deeper into the classically 
forbidden region. More specifically, we choose ε = 0.1 for 
−0.2 meV < Δ < 0 and ε = 0.05 for Δ < −0.2 meV. The expected systematic 
deviations for the determined speed due to the parabolic approxima
tion are 6.7% and 3.2%, respectively.
 Determination of the velocity vS
 We perform interferometric measurements in which we interfere the 
wave function with a spatially mirrored image of itself to detect phase 
gradients. For this purpose, we use a Mach–Zehnder interferometer, 
equipped with a Dove prism in one of the arms to mirror the image in 
one direction. The determination of the total wavevector, ktot
 , which 
describes the overall periodicity of the observed interference pattern, 
is performed like the one described above, namely, by analysing the 
Fourier spectrum of the images. Crucially, the observed interference 
patterns—and thus the wavevector ktot
 —depend not only on the intrin
sic phase gradients of the examined wave functions but also on the 
alignment of the interferometer. To determine the contribution of the 
interferometer, we investigate reference modes created in additional 
surface structures independent from the coupled waveguide system. 
These reference modes are designed to have a constant intrinsic phase. 
Their analysis yields the wavevector contribution due to the alignment 
of the interferometer, denoted as kMZI
 . This contribution is subtracted 
from ktot
 to determine the intrinsic phase gradients of the wave func
tions and the associated velocityv ħk k m = ( − )/ S tot MZI .